How do you Teach a Baby to Swim? Part 1

by Dr Shen-Li Lee

How to Teach Your Baby to Swim is written by Douglas Doman.



I had all the best intentions to teach Gareth to swim from as early as possible.  I even bought him the special neck float.  Up until recently, it was another one of those activities that I really wanted to do with the boys but could never find the time to get serious about it.  So this is me getting serious.  I went out and bought the book by Douglas Doman.

I scanned the chapter headings of the book in the store and thought it would be a handy book to get because it is divided into sections to help you teach your child to swim from birth to age six.  I had assumed that meant that you could teach a child how to swim using the methods described as long as he is under six years old.  Unfortunately, there is a bit of continuity between the chapters.  Each higher age group builds upon skills learned earlier so if your child is just starting out, it means having to start from scratch.  This works fine for an older child who is able to take instruction, but it gets a little tricky with a child between 6 and 12 months old, like Gareth.

Although both boys love the water, I find Gareth a lot more adventurous compared to his brother.  At this age, he is willing to do a lot more in the water than his brother was.  In fact, he is still willing to do a lot more in the water compared to his brother.  Displaying such eagerness every time he sees water, I felt I could not pass up this opportunity to try to teach him about swimming.

As I mentioned in an earlier post, babies have a dive reflex so that they do not inhale water when they are beneath the surface.  This reflex is present anywhere from birth up to one year.  Gareth, unfortunately, has started to choke on occasion when his head goes under so I get nervous about trying to teach him to dive.  Although he has been under a couple of times and does not appear phased by it, I find it difficult to intentionally dunk him under the water to encourage him to hold his breath.

Nevertheless, it hasn’t stopped me trying to teach the boys how to swim…

Some of the things I’ve been working on with them:

floating on their backs
blowing bubbles in the water
balancing
running under water
The following are very brief notes from the book “How to Teach Your Baby to Swim”.  I seriously recommend getting a copy of the book and reading it yourself before attempting this with your children.  Alternatively, try to attend a professional lesson on teaching babies how to swim.  I’m sure I don’t need to tell you, but as with all things that involve water and children – safety first.

As with all early learning activities, make sure there are lots of cuddles, laughter and fun in the activity.  The first lot of activities are done with newborns, but you can also do them with an older child.  With newborns, you can begin your program in a bathtub.  Unfortunately, we don’t have a bathtub big enough so we’ve got to get to a pool to practice.

Here the summary of things your baby should be able to do by the time you are through with this segment:

balancing and floating with chin on mother’s shoulder
floating on the back
blowing bubbles
bobbing up and down
passing under a shower followed by going underwater (after the tenth pass under the shower)
jumping into the bath or pool
grasping the side of the tub or mother’s thumbs
It is important to make sure that your baby is well rested and fed before scheduling a swimming session.  Also remember to bestow lots of hugs and kisses throughout the session.


**************************
You are here: Home / Sports & Exercise / How to Teach Your Baby to Swim
How to Teach Your Baby to Swim

by Dr Shen-Li Lee

After I had Gavin, I heard about babies having a natural ability to swim from a group of mothers at Fitfor2.  The information I had was rather vague but essentially it was something along the lines of:

Babies have a natural instinct for swimming because they have been floating around in amniotic fluid in the womb for nine months.  If you put them in water, they will instinctively swim.  As they get older, however, they lose this reflex.

That was about all I knew.  As to when they lost the instinct for swimming, nobody knew.  By the time I discovered the book “How to Teach Your Baby to Swim“, it seemed a bit too late to start the program on Gavin who had developed an aversion for deep water.

Recently, I found that elusive information about babies’ instincts for swimming on Baby Center:

Babies have a pair of reflexes that can make them appear to be good swimmers: the dive reflex and the swimming reflex.

The dive reflex

This reflex, also called the bradycardic response, causes babies to hold their breath and open their eyes when submerged, says Jeffrey Wagener, a pediatric pulmonologist in Denver. Parents can get this same reaction by blowing in their baby’s face. The response weakens as a baby gets older, but even adults have it to some degree.

Swedish researchers studying the dive reflex in 21 infants between 4 to 12 months old found that none of them inhaled water or choked during “diving” (being pulled underwater). They also noted that the babies didn’t seem apprehensive about the next dive. In fact, some seemed eager to dive again!

Many infant swim programs rely on the dive reflex to allow babies to “swim” before they’re old enough to hold their breath intentionally.

The swimming reflex

Until around 6 months, babies placed in water tummy-side down will move their arms and legs in a swimming motion. When the swimming reflex and the dive reflex are both engaged, a baby can look like a natural swimmer.

However, having both these reflexes doesn’t mean a baby won’t drown in water so if you’re intending to take your baby swimming, keep your hands on your baby.

Recently, while browsing through Safe ‘N Sound in 1Utama, I discovered some home equipment for helping your baby develop his swimming reflexes.  It is a product by Mambo Baby:



It is a float that fits around the neck of a child and can be used from birth up to age 2.  As far as I understand, it it commonly used in swimming programs for babies and toddlers because it offer them more freedom of movement compared to other float designs.

If you can’t get access to a pool, Mambo Baby also offer a special pool design of their own.  Unlike the normal wading pools for children, this pool is smaller in diameter and much deeper.  It allows your child to float in the water vertically without being able to touch the floor with his feet (80 cm in diameter and 80 cm high):



See the products in use on Youtube.

Although you can use these products to help your child get used to the feeling of being in the water, I don’t believe you need them in order to teach your baby to swim. In fact, many parents with infant swimmers do not use these products at all.

My desire for my children to learn how to swim from a young age stems more from a safety aspect than anything else.  Personally, I feel that the earlier they know how to swim the better.  There are programs that are focus on giving children aquatic survival skills such as the Infant Swimming Resource.  It teaches them to float on their back so they don’t drown.  Watch the video.

Wondering how to get started teaching a baby how to swim?  There is a good video from a baby swimming program in Australia that you can watch (just click the link).

I don’t know if we have such programs here so perhaps it’s time to get myself a copy of “How to Teach Your Baby to Swim“.

Please follow and like us: